AUTISM AND THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
TRAVIS LACROIX
Abstract. This paper critically examines the theory-of-mind-deficit explana-
tion of autism—a cognitive explanation of autistic behaviour that has signif-
icantly influenced empirical research and philosophical discourse surrounding
autism. However, the claim that autistics lack a theory of mind is false. Part of
the purpose of this paper is to describe how. First, a theory-of-mind deficit is
inadequate as an explanatory model. Second, prior research has demonstrated
the empirical failures of experiments intended to measure theory-of-mind abil-
ities. These facts together suggest that the science of theory of mind in the
context of autism is bad science. I argue that it is pseudoscience. This view
has important consequences for philosophers who uncritically invoke autism
(qua theory-of-mind deficit) as a thought experiment.
Keywords — Autism, Theory of Mind, Pseudoscience, Demarcation, Neu-
rodiversity, Double Empathy, Monotropism, Philosophy of Autism, Autistic
Philosophy, Philosophy on the Spectrum
What to do with scholarship that denies autistic agency,
denies autistic voice, denies autistic personhood?
— M. Remi Yergeau, "Occupying Autism"
1. Introduction
Empirical research on autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has aimed to elucidate
the psychological or cognitive mechanisms underpinning autism's behavioural man-
ifestations.1 Such cognitive explanations are supposed to further an aetiological un-
derstanding of autism by positing an "intervening variable" between biological and
Department of Philosophy, Dalhousie University
E-mail address: tlacroix@dal.ca.
Date: Unpublished draft of December, 2023. Please cite published version, if available.
1Throughout this paper, I use "autism" (and cognates) to refer to the actual thing in the world.
In contrast, I use Autism Spectrum Disorder, or ASD, to refer to the (pathologised) medical
labelling of autism and autistics. I take the former to be a metaphysical property denoting a
certain subset of the population, whereas the latter refers to a social construct that attempts to
describe that population (regardless of whether it does so successfully). Thus, I occasionally use
deficit language when describing ASD and research on ASD without committing to a negative
description of autistics themselves. At the same time, I use identity-first language (i.e., autistic
person) instead of person-first language (i.e., person with autism) to reflect the average preference
of the autistic community (see discussion in Sinclair (2013); Botha et al. (2021); Bradshaw et al.
(2021); Taboas et al. (2022)); "autistics" can be read as a shorthand for "autistic persons" or
"autistic individuals".
1

2
AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
environmental factors and autistic behaviour (Frith et al., 1991; Morton and Frith,
1995a,b; Pellicano, 2011). In the past half-century, numerous such hypotheses have
been forwarded, including the popular claim that autistics lack a theory of mind
(Baron-Cohen et al., 1985).
Theory-of-mind-deficit explanations of autism have been of particular interest to
philosophers in light of the normative and theoretical entailments of the possibility
of agents who are "unable" to attribute mental states to others. This fact would
have consequences for epistemology, the philosophy of mind, theories of meaning,
and normative theory, among other things. Thus, it should be unsurprising that
philosophers have used autism as a token thought experiment for philosophical
inquiry.
However, despite the rate at which philosophers repeat the claim that autistics
lack a theory of mind, this claim is false. Part of the purpose of this paper is to
describe how. On the one hand, previous research has demonstrated that a theory-
of-mind deficit is not an adequate explanatory model of autistic behaviour insofar
as purported theory-of-mind deficits are neither unique to nor universal amongst
autistics. At the same time, the theory-of-mind-deficit explanation of autism does
not have solid empirical grounding insofar as experiments that claim to measure
theory-of-mind differences between autistics and neurotypicals have failed to repli-
cate, and proxies for measuring theory of mind lack convergent validity. These facts
suggest that the "science" of theory of mind in the context of autism is, minimally,
bad science. However, the situation is more subtle.
Rather than abandoning this research programme, scholars who endorse the
theory-of-mind-deficit explanation of autism have engaged in question-begging, ad-
hoc hypothesising, and goalpost-shifting in an attempt to salvage the explanation.
This phenomenon occurs despite well-documented empirical failures of research
claiming to test theory-of-mind deficits in autistic individuals. Indeed, it continues
despite first-person testimony from autistics contradicting the claim that autistics
lack a theory of mind. Moreover, this view persists even though theory-of-mind-
deficit explanations of autism do little to serve the autistic community. Instead,
such theories reinforce the "pathology paradigm" (Walker, 2021) and further en-
trench dominance hierarchies of the "typical" neurotype, thus recapitulating the
dehumanisation and stigmatisation of autistics in society.
In considering the combination of poor scientific enquiry and the social dimension
of autism research, I argue that experimental "evidence" for the theory-of-mind-
deficit explanation of autism is not merely bad science; it is pseudoscience. The
pseudoscientific features of this body of research are elucidated by exploring the
following two questions:
(1) Do tests of theory of mind measure theory of mind?

AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
3
(2) What test could disprove the claim that autistics lack a theory of mind?
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes autism and ASD. Section 3
outlines several theories that posit a cognitive explanation for observable autistic
behaviour, particularly the theory-of-mind-deficit explanation. Section 4 outlines
the scientific basis of experiments purporting to test theory-of-mind abilities in
autistics, and Section 5 summarises the empirical failures of this research. Section 6
describes the demarcation problem and argues that the theory-of-mind-deficit ex-
planation is pseudoscientific. Section 7 concludes by examining this argument's
consequences for philosophers who uncritically invoke autism qua theory-of-mind
deficit as a thought experiment in normative research.
2. Autism and ASD
Autism is a neurodevelopmental difference that affects how autistics relate to
and interact with the environment and people around them. In contrast, autism
spectrum disorder (ASD) is a medical (pathological) categorisation of those who
exhibit certain sets of behavioural traits deemed deficits relative to the neurotypical
majority.
The diagnostic criteria for ASD have changed significantly since the codification
of behaviours observed by Grunya Ssucharewa (1926), Leo Kanner (1943), Hans As-
perger (1944), Lauretta Bender (1954), and others in the early 20th-Century. At this
time, ASD was described as a form of childhood schizophrenia (APA, 1952, 1958),2
later given its own classification—"infantile autism" and "autistic disorder"—in the
third iteration of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (APA,
1980, 1987).3 In 1994 and 2000, we got an expansion of autism categories under the
umbrella term "pervasive developmental disorders", which include autistic disorder,
Asperger's, Rett's, childhood disintegrative disorders and pervasive developmental
disorder - not otherwise specified (APA, 1994, 2000). This expansion implicitly
categorises autism as a spectrum—a concept advocated for by Lorna Wing in the
1980s (Wing and Gould, 1979).
The conceptualisation of autism as a spectrum is codified by the DSM 5, which
collapses the nosological variation of the DSM-IV and DSM-IV-TR back into a
single label: autism spectrum disorder. The DSM 5 criteria for an ASD diagnosis
requires persistent deficits in each of 3 areas of social communication and interaction
(A1-A3), including
A1. Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity;
2Asperger (1944) uses the label "autistic psychopathy", but here too the label "autism" is derived
from the concept of autism in schizophrenia.
3Note that the DSM, published by the American Psychiatric Association, is the primary noso-
logical reference in North America; outside of North America, the International Classification of
Diseases (ICD), published by the World Health Organisation, predominates.

4
AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
A2. Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviours used for social interaction;
and
A3. Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships.
In addition, individuals must display at least two of four types of restricted, repet-
itive behaviours (B1-B4):
B1. Stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects, or speech;
B2. Insistence on sameness, inflexible adherence to routines, or ritualised pat-
terns of verbal or nonverbal behaviour;
B3. Highly restricted, fixated interests that are abnormal in intensity or focus;
and
B4. Hyper- or hypo-reactivity to sensory input or unusual interest in sensory
aspects of the environment.
Levels of "severity" for each of (A1-A3) and (B1-B4) are rated based on support
needs (APA, 2013).4
Thus, although the diagnostic criteria have shifted significantly with each it-
eration of the DSM, it should be clear that the current description of ASD still
entrenches the "triad of impairments" model—social impairments, communication
impairments, and restricted or repetitive behaviour or interests—which was intro-
duced by Wing and Gould (1979). (Although "social impairments" and "commu-
nication impairments" are collapsed into a single "pillar" in the DSM 5.) One key
thing to note is that a diagnosis of ASD is based purely on behavioural character-
istics.
3. Cognitive Explanations of Autism
Since the early 1970s, owing to the experimental work of Hermelin and O'Connor
(1967, 1970); Frith (1970, 1972), much research has aimed to elucidate the psy-
chological or cognitive mechanisms underpinning the behavioural manifestations of
ASD (Pellicano, 2011). Despite its genetic basis, no specific gene is associated with
autism—recent studies have identified over 250 genes linked with autism, including
some de novo variations (Fu et al., 2022)—nor are there any biological markers
for autism. As such, researchers have focused on furthering our understanding of
autism by positing cognitive explanations that seek to determine an "intervening
variable" between biology and behaviour (Rutter, 1983; Frith et al., 1991; Morton
and Frith, 1995a,b). See Figure 1.
4In addition, these behavioural characteristics should (C) be present in the early developmental
period, (D) cause clinically significant impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of current functioning, and (E) not be better explained by intellectual disability or global
developmental delay.

AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
5
Aetiology
Underlying
Cause
(Biological)
Underlying
Cause
(Environmental)
Cognitive Explanation
Intervening
Variable
(cognition)
Observable Behaviour
("Triad of Impairments")
Social Impairments
Communication Impairments
Restricted / Repetitive
Behaviour / Interests
Figure 1. Cognitive-explanation model of ASD
To be explanatorily useful, a primary cognitive deficit must be "universal, spe-
cific, and necessary and sufficient to cause the symptoms of the disorder . . . in other
words, the proximal cognitive cause of the behavioural symptoms of the disorder"
(Pennington and Ozonoff, 1996, 57). In addition, the primary cognitive marker
should have causal priority—meaning that it should be able to explain the earliest-
emerging features of autism (Happ´e, 1994b; Boucher, 1996; Tager-Flusberg, 2001).
Numerous hypotheses concerning the cognitive "deficits" characterising ASD
have been forwarded in the past half-century, including atypical "central" processes
such as sequencing, concept formation and abstraction (Hermelin and O'Connor,
1970); core problems in language (Rutter, 1968); sensory and perceptual atypicality
(Ornitz and Ritvo, 1968); disruption of "complex" information processing (Minshew
et al., 1992, 1997); poor social responsiveness (Klin and Volkmar, 1993; Mundy and
Sigman, 1989); and, impairments in interpersonal relatedness (Hobson, 1989, 1993,
2002), among many others.5
However, three particularly salient theories have been influential in directing re-
search and conceptualisations of autism. The "theory of mind" hypothesis claims
that autism is caused primarily by a specific inability to impute mental states to
oneself and others (Baron-Cohen et al., 1985, 2000; Tager-Flusberg, 2007). The
"executive dysfunction" hypothesis proposes that autistic behaviours are a result
of a dysexecutive syndrome—a primary problem in the executive control of action
(Hughes and Russell, 1993; Ozonoff et al., 1991a; Hill, 2004; Russo et al., 1998).
And, "weak" central coherence theory posits that autistic individuals tend to focus
on individual elements rather than wholes combined with an inability to integrate
information into context (Frith, 1989; Frith and Happ´e, 1994; Happ´e and Booth,
2008; Happ´e and Frith, 2008). It is worth noting that each model posits a single
cause at the cognitive level of analysis. This feature is reason alone to think that
5See further discussion in Pellicano (2011).

6
AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
none of these hypotheses can be correct since autism is nothing if not heteroge-
neous.6
This paper focuses on the theory-of-mind explanation of ASD because, despite
being false, it pervades popular descriptions of autistics. At the same time, some
researchers have argued that these competing explanations are compatible insofar
as, e.g., weak central coherence might be a facet of executive dysfunction (Frith,
2003) or theory-of-mind deficits might be caused by executive dysfunction (Frith
and Happ´e, 1999; Happ´e, 2000; Gl¨uer and Pagin, 2003). Importantly, all three
theories are purported to entail some facts about an impaired theory of mind (Frith,
2003).
4. The Science of Theory of Mind
Despite its prevalence in the discourse surrounding ASD, theory of mind is a
vexed concept. That said, one standard definition of theory of mind is the ability
to impute or attribute mental states—e.g., emotions, intentions, desires, beliefs,
etc.—to oneself or others (Dennett, 1978; Wimmer and Perner, 1983; Gallese and
Sinigaglia, 2011). Early tests of theory-of-mind abilities involved so-called false-
belief tasks, which are assumed to require, minimally, the ability to represent the
mental states of others, understand that those mental states may differ from present
experience—i.e., the here and the now—and distinguish others' mental states from
one's own. All of these are taken to be standard "mindreading" or "mentalising"
abilities.
Empirical "evidence" for the claim that autistics lack a theory of mind is given
in a series of experiments, beginning in the 1980s, that utilise false-belief tasks
to determine whether children (autistic or otherwise) can attribute false beliefs to
another agent. One classic experiment, called the Sally-Anne test, uses the puppet-
play paradigm (Wimmer and Perner, 1983) to probe belief attribution in children.
The landmark study by Baron-Cohen et al. (1985), entitled "Does the autistic child
have a theory of mind?"—a reference to Premack and Woodruff (1978)—led to the
proposal that theory-of-mind deficits might explain the core features of autism
(Baron-Cohen, 1993; Leslie, 1987, 1991; Frith et al., 1991; Baron-Cohen, 1995).
However, it should immediately be apparent that such an explanation could only
account for the socio-communicative aspects of ASD (A1-A3 above), but not the
non-social aspects (B1-B4); this is discussed in more detail below.
6In light of this, some authors have proposed multi-deficit cognitive models of autism—see, e.g.,
Wing and Wing (1971); Goodman (1989); Bishop (1989); Pennington et al. (1997); others have
proposed that the triad of impairments may be dissociated so that each impairment (separately
inheritable) has a separate cause—see, e.g., Bolton et al. (1994); Piven et al. (1997). See also
discussion in Pellicano (2011).

AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
7
The children in the experiment are shown two puppets, called "Sally" and
"Anne". The child watches Sally place a marble in a basket and then leave the
scene. While Sally is away, Anne moves the marble from the basket to a box. Sally
then returns to the scene, and the child is asked, "Where will Sally look for the
marble". If the child answers "the basket", this is taken as evidence that the child
is capable of attributing to Sally the false belief, the marble is in the basket,
despite that the child herself believes (truly) that the marble is in the box. If the
child answers that Sally will look in the box, then this is taken as a failure to at-
tribute a false belief to Sally, which is taken, in turn, as evidence for lack of theory
of mind.
In Baron-Cohen et al.'s (1985) original study, the experimental design included
a "typically-developing" group (n1 = 27), a "Down's syndrome" group (n2 = 14),
and an autistic group (n3 = 20). Each child is asked three control questions and
one experimental question:
Naming Question
Which doll is Sally? Which is Anne?
Reality Question
Where is the marble really?
Memory Question
Where was the marble at the beginning?
Belief Question
Where will Sally look for the marble?
The naming question ensures that the children know which doll is which; this is
important because if they think "Sally" refers to Anne, they would answer the
belief question "incorrectly" by stating (correctly) that "Sally"—referring to Anne—
would look in the box (false negative). The reality question is also an important
control because if the child answers "correctly"—because she thinks that the marble
is in the basket—then this would confound the results of the experimental question
(false positive). The memory question is also an important control because if the
child answers incorrectly—e.g., if she forgot the marble was in the basket and thinks
that the marble was in the box at the start—then this would again confound the
results of the experimental question (false negative). All of the subjects in all three
groups answered the naming, memory, and reality questions correctly (Baron-Cohen
et al., 1985, 42).
However, when posed with the experimental question—the belief question—85%
of the typically-developing children and 86% of the children with Down's syndrome
answered that Anne will look for the marble in the basket; in contrast, 80% of the
autistic children answered that Anne will look for the marble in the box. These
experimental results led to the assertion that "autistic children as a group fail to
employ a theory of mind" (Baron-Cohen et al., 1985, 43), where such a failure is
understood as an inability to represent mental states, which leads to an inability to
impute beliefs to others, which causes a "grave disadvantage" in predicting others'
behaviour (43).

8
AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
Other experiments have been devised as proxies for testing theory-of-mind abil-
ities, including second-order false-belief tasks (Baron-Cohen, 1989), which involve
asking where some third party will think that Sally thinks the marble is; strange
stories (Happ´e, 1994a; White et al., 2009), which involves explaining why a char-
acter in a short vignette might have said something that is not literally true; faux
pas (Baron-Cohen et al., 1999), which involves asking subjects why a statement
is unintentionally (socially) "wrong" or awkward; animated triangles (Abell et al.,
2000), which involves describing what is happening in an animated clip containing
geometric shapes; and reading the mind in the eyes (Baron-Cohen et al., 2001),
which involves matching emotion and mental state descriptions to static images of
the eye region of faces.
As a consequence of Baron-Cohen et al. (1985) and subsequent experiments, the
view that autistics lack a theory of mind now pervades psychology. As Gernsbacher
and Yergeau (2019) highlight, this view "is taught across a wide range of psychol-
ogy textbooks. The assertion is argued by psychologists in state and federal court
cases. The assertion is promoted by thousands of psychology articles" (2), the vast
majority of which take the claim for granted. However, theory-of-mind deficits can-
not adequately explain autism, and experimental evidence and autistic testimony
both suggest that the theory-of-mind-deficit explanation of autism is false. The
subsequent section summarises prior research on the inadequacy of the theory-of-
mind-deficit theory of autism. Additional details can be found in Pellicano (2011),
Gernsbacher (2018), and Gernsbacher and Yergeau (2019).
5. The Bad Science of Mind
In order for a putative cognitive model of autism to be genuinely explanatory,
the explanatory features that the model proposes should: (1) be universal, or near
universal, among autistics; (2) be unique to autistics (i.e., not present in individ-
uals with other developmental conditions); (3) show causal precedence; (4) show
explanatory power (i.e., the incidence and severity of the deficit should be directly
related to the behavioural characteristics in each of the three domains).7
As noted above, 80% of autistic children in the experiment conducted by Baron-
Cohen et al. (1985) failed the false-belief task. This result, of course, logically
implies that 20% of the autistic children passed the false-belief task. Subsequent
studies have had highly variable failure rates for autistics on several tasks intended
to measure theory-of-mind capacities, ranging from 85% (Reed and Peterson, 1990)
to 45% (Prior et al., 1990), with at least one study reporting only 10% of autistic
7See discussion in, e.g., Rutter (1983); Pennington and Ozonoff (1996); Boucher (1996); Happ´e
(1994b); Tager-Flusberg (2001).

AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
9
participants as failing the task (Dahlgren and Trillingsgaard, 1996). Therefore, al-
leged theory-of-mind deficits are not universal to autistics, and it is highly unlikely
that they play any significant causal role in explaining the development of autism
(Pellicano, 2011). Since failure on false-belief tasks (and other purported measures
of theory-of-mind abilities) are not universal among autistics, the theory-of-mind
deficit hypothesis fails the universality condition.8
At the same time, failure on false-belief tasks is also not unique to autistics,
as many other populations of children fail these tasks.9 Gernsbacher and Yergeau
(2019) highlight that "the more atypical the child, the more likely they are to
fail false belief tasks" (103). Perhaps most importantly, children with no social or
emotional disability but specific language impairments also fail false-belief tasks
(Miller, 2001). This fact makes good sense because studies have shown that false-
belief tasks depend highly on linguistic ability (Milligan et al., 2007) and that syntax
and semantics contribute to false belief understanding (Slade and Ruffman, 2005).
Linguistic analysis highlights the syntactic complexity of the belief question on
some false-belief tasks since these sentences "exhibit sentential complement con-
structions, in which a complement clause is embedded in the matrix clause" (Gerns-
bacher and Frymiare, 2005, 6). As it happens, vocabulary alone predicts perfor-
mance on false-belief tasks more accurately than whether a participant is autistic
(Loukusa et al., 2014; Norbury, 2005). Because theory-of-mind tasks rely heavily
on complex language and because ASD, by diagnostic definition, involves commu-
nicative differences, it is unsurprising that autistic participants perform less well
than non-autistic participants (when they do). Furthermore, because autistics vary
in their communicative abilities, it is unsurprising that autistic people vary in their
false-belief task performance. Thus, it should be uncontroversial that failure on
false-belief tasks—often interpreted as a failure of mentalising abilities associated
with theory of mind—is not unique to autistics.
Furthermore, neurotypical children do not pass false-belief tasks, on average,
until age 4. However, certain autistic behaviours—including atypicality in social
responsiveness and reciprocity, gaze behaviour, joint attention, and imitation—
may be noticeable around the age of 18-24 months (Dawson and Adams, 1984;
Volkmar et al., 1987; Mundy and Sigman, 1989; Klin et al., 1992). This observation
8See further discussion in Ozonoff et al. (1991b); Bailey et al. (1996); Beversdorf et al. (1998);
Bauminger and Kasari (1999); Buitelaar et al. (1999); Charman (2000); Pellicano (2011); Boucher
(2012); Gernsbacher and Yergeau (2019) and citations in Gernsbacher (2018).
9For example, deaf or blind children (Peterson and Siegal, 1995, 1999; Russell et al., 1998; Brown
et al., 1997; Minter et al., 1998; Tager-Flusberg, 2001; Green et al., 2004), children with particular
language impairments (Miller, 2001; Loukusa et al., 2014; Norbury, 2005), Down's syndrome
(Zelazo et al., 1996), Williams syndrome (Lo et al., 2013), cerebral palsy (Dahlgren, 2002; Caillies
et al., 2012), Parkinson's (Saltzman et al., 2000), Fragile X (Cornish et al., 2005), epilepsy (Raud
et al., 2015), and more (Benson et al., 1993; Yirmiya et al., 1996; Zelazo et al., 1996; Benson et al.,
1993; Payne et al., 1995; Reidy et al., 2013; Rasmussen et al., 2009).

10
AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
implies that theory of mind does not have causal precedence for explaining autism.
This fact has led some researchers to broaden the definition of "theory of mind" to
include precursors, such as eye-gaze detection and shared attention (Baron-Cohen,
1994, 1995). However, this broadening of criteria leads to a circularity whereby the
earliest behavioural signs of autism are defined as components of a theory-of-mind
deficit (Hughes and Leekam, 2004; Pellicano, 2011). Rather than being responsive
to empirical evidence, this redefinition threatens to make the statement "autistics
lack a theory of mind" only trivially true.
Thus, purported theory-of-mind deficits are neither unique to nor universal in
autistics, and the theory-mind-deficit explanation of autism lacks causal precedence
and explanatory power. From these facts, it follows that the theory-of-mind-deficit
explanation is inadequate as an cognitive model of autism.
In addition to being a poor causal model, Gernsbacher and Yergeau (2019) thor-
oughly document key empirical failures of tests that purport to measure theory
of mind. Besides the lack of specificity (uniqueness) and universality with regard
to autistics' failing theory-of-mind tasks mentioned above, many of the tasks pro-
posed to assess theory of mind fail to converge. For example, "strange stories" fails
to correlate with "reading the mind in the eyes", "animated triangles", and "faux
pas" tasks, particularly when language comprehension is controlled.10 Similarly,
"reading the mind in the eyes" fails to correlate significantly with the "faux pas",
"animated triangles", "false belief", and other theory-of-mind tasks.11 Moreover,
false-belief tasks can fail to correlate significantly with one another.12 Gernsbacher
and Yergeau (2019) suggest that the lack of convergent validity among theory-of-
mind tasks undermines the degree to which these tasks actually measure theory of
mind in participants—i.e., construct validity.
At the same time, a lack of theory of mind should entail difficulty with several
distinct social abilities—e.g., social attention, cooperation, anticipation, persuasion,
deception, avoidance, etc. However, studies have demonstrated that autistics of all
ages can understand others' intentions, goals, and desires.13
10See Spek et al. (2010); Ahmed and Miller (2011); Scherzer et al. (2012); Vetter et al. (2013);
Hollocks et al. (2014); Wilson et al. (2014); Chen et al. (2017); Lukito et al. (2017) and discussion
in Gernsbacher (2018); Gernsbacher and Yergeau (2019).
11See Ozonoff et al. (1991a); Bora et al. (2005); Spek et al. (2010); Ahmed and Miller (2011);
Duval et al. (2011); Gooding and Pflum (2011); White et al. (2011); Scherzer et al. (2012); Li
et al. (2013); Hollocks et al. (2014); Chen et al. (2017); Lukito et al. (2017), and discussion in
Gernsbacher (2018); Gernsbacher and Yergeau (2019).
12See Charman and Campbell (1997); Hughes (1998); Duval et al. (2011), and discussion in
Gernsbacher (2018); Gernsbacher and Yergeau (2019).
13See, e.g., Aldridge et al. (2000); Carpenter et al. (2001); Russell and Hill (2001); Kerr and
Durkin (2004); Ponnet et al. (2005); Sebanz et al. (2005); Hubert et al. (2007); Liebal et al.
(2008); Colombi et al. (2009); Falck-Ytter (2010); Channon et al. (2011); McAleer et al. (2011);
Vivanti et al. (2011); Fitzpatrick et al. (2013); Berger and Ingersoll (2014); Forgeot d'Arc et al.

AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
11
Finally, reproducing studies' results is one of the cornerstones of scientific in-
quiry. Nonetheless, the findings of many highly-cited studies have failed to replicate.
Contrary to the findings of Baron-Cohen et al. (1985), subsequent studies found
no statistically significant differences between autistic and non-autistic groups on
first-order false-belief tasks.14 Gernsbacher and Yergeau (2019) enumerate simi-
lar failures to reproduce the experimental results of second-order false-belief tasks
(Baron-Cohen, 1989) and strange stories tasks (Happ´e, 1994a).
All this research together suggests that the theory-of-mind-deficit theory of
autism is bad science. (Of course, this has not prevented outlandish claims about
autistics lacking a theory of mind.) In the next section, I argue that the theory-of-
mind-deficit explanation of autism is not merely bad science but pseudoscience.
6. The Pseudoscience of Mind
Following the fundamental issue at the heart of demarcating science from pseu-
doscience (Fuller, 1985, 331), we can ask: Are beliefs about autistics' purported
lack of a theory of mind epistemically warranted? Although there is disagreement
about general principles for demarcating science and pseudoscience, there is more
agreement on individual cases (Hansson, 2021). Although I will examine alternative
criteria below, I begin with the classic Popperian approach to demarcation which
suggests that for a hypothesis to be scientific, it must be falsifiable—in the sense
that "statements or systems of statements . . . must be capable of conflicting with
possible, or conceivable observations" (Popper, 1962, 32). In this case, a theoretical
sentence is falsifiable just in case it logically contradicts some empirical sentence
that describes a logically possible event that it would be logically possible to ob-
serve (Hansson, 2021). In this sense, good science is supposed to be risky. So, good
scientific theories consist of highly-falsifiable statements that have been well-tested
and, thus far, not falsified.
However, as has already been noted, even the earliest research shows that many
autistic subjects pass tests that purport to measure theory-of-mind abilities. On
the assumption that neurotypicals passing these tasks implies that they have a
functioning theory of mind, it should presumably follow that autistics passing these
tasks implies they have a functioning theory of mind. Indeed, early on in this
research, Happ´e (1994a) notes that the success of autistic subjects at false-belief
tasks "could be regarded as genuine proof of their possessing a theory of mind"
(130). On the falsifiability criterion for demarcating science from pseudoscience,
(2016); Green et al. (2017); Cole et al. (2018); Li et al. (2019) and discussion in Gernsbacher and
Yergeau (2019).
14See Oswald and Ollendick (1989); Dahlgren and Trillingsgaard (1996); Yirmiya and Shulman
(1996); Yirmiya et al. (1996); Russell and Hill (2001); Moran et al. (2011); Fitzpatrick et al. (2013),
and discussion in Gernsbacher (2018); Gernsbacher and Yergeau (2019).

12
AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
theory-of-mind-deficit theory of autism is indeed scientific—insofar as the claim
that autistics lack a theory of mind is, in principle, falsifiable. It just happens that
this is also bad science insofar as the theoretical sentences comprising the theory-
of-mind-deficit theory of autism have been repeatedly contradicted by empirical
statements of fact—i.e., falsified.
Unfortunately, the state of inquiry surrounding theory of mind and autism is
more pernicious than this. Although Happ´e (1994a) admits that the success of
autistic subjects at false-belief tasks "could be regarded" as evidence against the
theory-of-mind deficit in autistics, she continues: "Alternatively, their success could
be seen not as proof of theory-of-mind ability but rather as evidence of the 'hack-
ing out' of some strategy for solving the tasks" (130). Thus, researchers create
new measures when existing measures fail to support the claim that autistics lack
a theory of mind.15 Some have argued that non-autistic clinical groups may fail
false-belief tasks for reasons other than a "genuine" representational deficit (Baron-
Cohen, 2000; Tager-Flusberg, 2001). Researchers have previously argued that al-
though some autistics could pass first-order false-belief tasks, they still failed at
(more difficult) second-order false-belief tasks (Baron-Cohen, 1989). This practice
underscores the moving goalposts of the theory-of-mind explanation of autism.
There is a dilemma hidden here, which can be summarised as follows. If we accept
that tasks which purport to measure theory-of-mind ability are good proxies, then
the theory-of-mind-deficit explanation of autism is falsifiable (so perhaps scientific)
but also falsified. Hence, the researchers who persist with attempts to demonstrate
a lack of theory of mind in autistics are acting unscientifically. On the other hand, if
the explanation for why tasks that purport to measure theory-of-mind abilities fail
to do so is because they are not good proxies, or if contrary evidence is explained
away by defining autism as involving a lack of theory of mind, then the statement
"autistics lack a theory of mind" becomes unfalsifiable and hence pseudoscientific.
Let us examine the second horn first. We have already seen that studies have
demonstrated that autistics can understand others' intentions, goals, and desires—
prototypical theory-of-mind abilities. At the same time, autistics sometimes fail
tasks that purport to measure theory of mind. These two facts suggest that these
tasks do not actually measure theory-of-mind abilities; hence, they are bad proxies.
(Recall that many such tasks are better indicators of linguistic ability than theory-
of-mind ability.)
15This is a stunning example of Goodhart's Law: when a measure becomes a target, it ceases to
be a good measure.

AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
13
Furthermore, several of these tasks lack a ground truth because the "correct" an-
swers to the experimenter's questions are context-relative. For example, the reading-
the-mind-in-the-eyes task presupposed that emotions can be read from static im-
ages, but emotions are highly dependent upon context and culture (Pugh et al.,
2021). Considering the Sally-Anne test, researchers assume that the "correct" an-
swer is that the marble is in the box; however, autistics have underscored competing
explanations, the plausibility of which highlight the lack of objective truth about
the matter. For example, one commentator wonders whether the results might differ
if the dolls were presented as children rather than adults. This question reflects a
belief, which some children might hold, that adults simply know things, and hence
Sally would know that the marble is in the box (Blackburn et al., 2019).
Part of the point worth highlighting here is that autistic ways of thinking often
differ from neurotypical ways of thinking. Indeed, the Sally-Anne test suggests that
even if the participant could not know something in a given situation (e.g., if she
were in Sally's position), this does not imply that someone else would not be able
to know something in the same situation. Again, knowledge here is highly context-
dependent, and an individual might have different reasons for believing something
in light of having, e.g., different background knowledge. Consider, for example, that
Anne always moves Sally's marble from the basket to the box. Suppose also that
Sally and Anne are good friends—i.e., Sally knows that Anne is always up to some
mischief. Hence, when Sally leaves the scene and comes back, she might think,
"Anne probably moved my marble again", and look in the box rather than the
basket.
This rationalisation might sound utterly ad hoc; however, it is worth noting
that all the co-authors of Baron-Cohen et al. (1985) frequently refer to Anne as
"naughty Anne" in writing (Frith, 1989, 1991, 1998, 2001, 2008; Frith and Happ´e,
1999; Leslie, 1992; Baron-Cohen, 2003a). It is unclear whether this is the language
that the experimenter uses in practice; however, if it is, then there is no reason
why a subject might not pick up on this and consider that in her answer.16 Rather
than lacking a theory of mind, such an analysis suggests that autistics are more
adept at such tasks as they do not "jump to conclusions", in the way that the
(neurotypical) experimenters clearly expect the subject to do. Thus, autistics have
aptly highlighted that the "correct" answer to the Sally-Anne task is not "Sally
will look for the marble in the basket"; a better answer is something akin to, "It is
very likely that Sally will look for the marble in the basket, but it is not impossible
16As far as I am aware, there are no scripts or transcripts from the original experiment in 1985;
however, in several video recordings demonstrating the Sally-Anne task, the experimenter does
indeed refer to Anne as "naughty Anne" or "tricky Anne".

14
AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
that she will look in the box, or maybe in some other place, or she may not look
for the marble at all" (Blackburn et al., 2019).
Researchers interested in measuring theory of mind in autism have typically
ignored the possibility that autistics' passing these tasks demonstrates theory-of-
mind abilities.17 This, of course, is despite ample evidence to the contrary and also
despite the irrefutable position that neurotypicals' success on these tasks demon-
strates theory of mind. For example, Bloom and German (2000) suggest that
Some [autistic individuals] fail the false belief task because they lack
the capacity to acquire a theory of mind. In contrast, [typically-
developing] 3-year-olds might fail the false belief task because of
general task demands, because they don't have a grasp of false
belief, or both. But [the typically-developing children] surely have
a "theory of mind", in the general sense of having a sophisticated
ability to reason about the mental states; this is precisely why they
differ from autistic individuals in the social, communicative, and
imaginative domains. (B29)
Hence, in practice, theory-of-mind abilities are taken for granted in neurotypicals,
whereas theory-of-mind deficits come to define autism. Barnbaum (2008) goes so
far as to suggest that the "whole point of theory of mind deficits is that the lack of
theory of mind is a fundamental deficit that is characteristic of autism: If he did not
have a compromised theory of mind, he would not be autistic" (Barnbaum, 2008,
160). Thus, the claim that "autistics lack a theory of mind" becomes analytic; hence,
this statement is unfalsifiable. Once researchers have decided that autistics lack a
theory of mind, no evidence could prove this false. The catch-22 here is that a lack of
a theory of mind is taken to imply a lack of a theory of one's own mind (Carruthers,
1996). Hence, autistic testimony to the effect "I have a theory of mind" can be waved
away on this account. For example, in response to an autistic subject's first-personal
report about his inner experience, Frith and Happ´e (1999) write, "Very little of this
description seemed believable" (13).18 This is pseudoscience.
Now let us examine the first horn of the dilemma. Suppose that tasks purport-
ing to measure theory-of-mind abilities are good proxies. In this case, the claim
"autistics lack a theory of mind" has been falsified. Nonetheless, researchers persist
in repeating the claim, devising increasingly challenging experiments to attempt to
prove it.
17See, for example, the ad hoc explanations given by Happ´e (1994a,b, 1995); Frith et al. (1994);
Tager-Flusberg (2001); Baron-Cohen (2006), and the criticism of this logic in Gernsbacher and
Yergeau (2019).
18One might reasonably wonder how the authors could know this.

AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
15
Sometimes, in the history of science, practising scientists do not abandon a theory
in light of falsifying empirical evidence. Sometimes, in the history of science, this is
okay. For example, Newtonian celestial mechanics is falsified by the precession of the
perihelion of Mercury. However, despite empirical evidence contradicting the theory,
researchers did not abandon Newtonian mechanics; instead, they formulated new
explanations that would allow them to hold on to the theory while explaining away
the empirical observations that contradicted it—e.g., the existence of a hitherto
unobserved planet could affect the perihelion of Mercury in such a way that the
observations maintain consistency with Newtonian mechanics.
On Popper's (1962) criterion, one might think that this is unscientific. However,
Lakatos (1970) contends that scientists were right not to abandon Newtonian me-
chanics. In this case, the theory was particularly useful, so there was good pragmatic
reason not to abandon it despite falsifying evidence. Furthermore, this is often how
science works when considering the sociology of scientific practice and a pragmatic
epistemology of science (Waters, 2019). Hence, Popper's falsifiability criterion for
demarcating science and pseudoscience is too restrictive.
Lakatos's (1970) notion of methodological falsification posits a sequence of theo-
ries, called a research programme, which includes a shared "hard core" in addition
to auxiliary hypotheses. The auxiliary hypotheses connect the programme's hard
core to the empirical world (via predictions) while also "protecting" the hard core,
making it effectively irrefutable. In this case, the combination of the hard core and
the auxiliary hypotheses are subject to empirical tests; therefore, a programme, on
the whole, is (in principle) falsifiable. When an empirical prediction turns out to be
false, science progresses by retaining the hard core of the programme and construct-
ing new auxiliary hypotheses. In this case, a research programme is called progres-
sive if it is both theoretically progressive—meaning that the hard core plus auxiliary
hypotheses predict novel empirical facts—and experimentally progressive—meaning
that some of the novel empirical facts predicted by the theory can be tested. Here,
"novelty" means that a prediction is not furnished by a previous theory in the
sequence and is not predicted by competing theories (or conventional wisdom).
Thus, theoretical progressiveness requires that each new theory in a research
programme (a sequence of theories) should have excess empirical content over and
above its predecessor. In contrast, a research programme is degenerating just in
case it either does not predict novel facts (theoretically degenerating) or none of
the novel facts it predicts can be tested (experimentally degenerating). Hence we
can demarcate good and bad science (or genuine and pseudoscience) as follows. A

16
AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
sequence of theories is good science if it is progressive and bad if it is degener-
ating; furthermore, a research programme may degenerate so much as to become
pseudoscience.19
By analogy, just as scientists did not abandon Newtonian mechanics despite fal-
sifying evidence, we might think that researchers have not abandoned the theory-of-
mind-deficit explanation of autism despite falsifying evidence. The question, then,
is whether this is warranted.
It is easier to demarcate the components of a research programme in historical
cases than contemporary ones because we have the benefit of hindsight. For exam-
ple, when considering the precession of the perihelion of Mercury, we can clearly
differentiate the hard core—Newtonian mechanics—from the auxiliary hypotheses.
In the case of the theory-of-mind-deficit explanation of autism, however, it is less
clear whether a lack of theory of mind constitutes the research programme's hard
core or an auxiliary hypothesis. If the former, then the theory-of-mind-deficit expla-
nation of autism should be protected from falsification. However, the hard core of a
research programme is not typically empirical. For example, Newtonian mechanics
can be used to predict the movement of celestial bodies, but it will not tell you
anything about what the night sky actually looks like. (To know this, one must go
into the world and observe the stars.) This is why the auxiliary hypotheses serve
to connect the hard core to the empirical world by positing statements that are
testable and so require empirical observation. A lack of theory of mind would have
empirical consequences, so it appears to be an auxiliary hypothesis.
Of course, it may be the case that Newtonian mechanics, as the hard core of
a research programme, does have some empirical content which happens to be
highly abstract. At the same time, it is probably more difficult to clearly separate
the "purely" theoretical versus empirical components of psychology that it is with
theoretical physics, insofar as any psychological theory is bound to have some em-
pirical content. Notwithstanding, it seems more apt to describe the theory as an
auxiliary hypothesis in a research programme whose hard core involves some broad
generalisations of psychology—e.g., that there are such things as mental states,
that mental states depend on brain states, that some generalisations about them
can be explained genetically whereas others require an environmental basis, etc.
Such a hard core presumably consists of the sorts of claims that guide psycholog-
ical model-building in general. A specific claim about a cognitive explanation in
a specific branch of psychology—such as the theory-of-mind-deficit explanation of
autism—is far too narrow to serve as part of a hard core of a scientific research
programme, in Lakatos' sense.
19Note that the distinct questions of whether something is scientific or pseudoscientific and
whether something is good or bad science are collapsed into a single axis on this account.

AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
17
Furthermore, for this horn, we assumed that tests of theory-of-mind abilities are
good proxies—i.e., they actually measure theory of mind to some degree. It follows
that this auxiliary hypothesis has been repeatedly falsified in light of the empirical
evidence discussed in Section 5. Hence, the facts predicted by the theory have
failed to be borne out, implying that the theory is experimentally degenerating. As
it happens, the theory is also theoretically degenerating insofar as it lacks excess
empirical content. Once again, novelty is time-relative on this account. So, even
if the predictions furnished by the theory-of-mind-deficit explanation of autism
were novel in 1985, the explanation is no longer theoretically progressive.20 Thus,
it is somewhat over-determined that theory-of-mind-deficit explanations of autism
constitute a degenerating research programme.
Both horns of the dilemma lead to the same conclusion. Hence, beliefs about
autistics' purported lack of a theory of mind are not epistemically warranted. This
research programme is not merely bad science; it is pseudoscientific.
At the same time, however, autistic researchers have proposed alternative expla-
nations to the theory-of-mind-deficit explanation of autism. For example, monotrop-
ism theory suggests that autistics' interests direct attention more strongly than in
non-autistics (Murray et al., 2005). This view accounts for autistic inertia, sensory
differences, social differences, and focused interests inherent to autistics without in-
voking pathologising, deficit-based language (Murray, 2018). Similarly, the double
empathy problem (Milton, 2012; Milton et al., 2022) argues that the apparent social
and communicative difficulties observed in autistics that have led to the claim that
they lack a theory of mind are actually due to a reciprocal lack of understand-
ing and bidirectional differences in communication style, social-cognitive charac-
teristics, and experiences between different neurotypes (Crompton et al., 2020c).
Hence, mismatches in communication styles can contribute to autistic social difficul-
ties (Davis and Crompton, 2021). These proposals constitute good science insofar
as they are falsifiable and they generate novel predictions. Recent research on intra-
and inter-neurotype information transfer has provided empirical evidence support-
ing the double-empathy problem (Crompton et al., 2020a,b,c), the findings of which
are inconsistent with the social-cognitive deficit narrative of autism.
20Attempts have been made to re-invigorate the theory's novelty, thus salvaging the claim that
autistics lack a theory of mind. For example, admitting that a theory-of-mind deficit could only
account for the social aspects of ASD, Baron-Cohen (2002, 2003b, 2010) has embedded "mind-
blindness" within a larger theory dubbed the "extreme male brain" theory of autism (sometimes
called the "empathising-systematising (E-S)" theory of autism). However, it is not obvious that
sexing the brain makes the theory-of-mind-deficit explanation of autism better. Instead, it trades
one falsehood for another. Rippon (2020) aptly refers to this theory as "neurotrash". See Krahn
and Fenton (2012a); Sample (2013); Ridley (2019) for lucid criticisms.

18
AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
7. The Normativity of Mind
Much of the research discussed in the previous sections might be called "primary"
insofar as it includes on-the-ground experiments and novel data. When consider-
ing how philosophers engage with autism, the literature is typically secondary—
philosophers usually cite the primary experimental literature rather than conduct-
ing experiments themselves. Given the apparent contingent of researchers in the
primary literature that are inexplicably wedded to the claim that autistics lack a
theory of mind in some form, this implies that the claims are repeated by philoso-
phers. And, indeed they are: philosophers referencing this literature simply take for
granted that autistics lack a theory of mind. Beginning from this assumption, this
secondary (philosophical) literature proceeds to draw out the logical entailments of
this "fact".
For example, we have already seen that if autistics lack a theory of mind, then
autistics lack a theory of their own minds—i.e., they lack self-consciousness (Frith
and Happ´e, 1999)—which in turn implies that they lack (first-personal) epistemic
authority (Carruthers, 1996) or they lack the property of moral personhood (Warren,
1973). Furthermore, if autistics lack the property of moral personhood, then they
presumably do not have full and equal moral rights (Warren, 1973), or they are
not deemed members of the moral community (Benn, 1999)—i.e., those individuals
with whom others share moral obligations.
These considerations seem to empower neurotypicals to enact epistemic injustices
toward autistics on the assumption that they do not know any better.21 The in-
built testimonial injustice following from a lack of theory of mind reinforces the view
since no evidence to the contrary—e.g., autistics uttering propositions like "I do not
lack a theory of mind"—needs to be taken seriously. The exclusion of autistics from
the moral community also raises questions about autistics' right to life, which can
be used to justify research funding on the prevention of autism via genetics—i.e.,
eugenics programmes which are couched in the language of a "cure".22
21As a salient example of this brand of ableism, in 2023, several states in the USA passed bills
that restrict gender-affirming care, mentioning autism by name as a justification. For example,
the state of Georgia's S.B.140 says that because gender dysphoria is "often comorbid with other
mental health and developmental conditions, including autism spectrum disorder", certain surgical
procedures for the treatment of gender dysphoria in minors should be prohibited (Georgia General
Assembly, 2023). The logic here is that autistics do not know themselves; thus, when an autistic
says, "I am trans", they can be ignored. Among other things, these laws provide further evidence
in favour of the claim that ableism is the packaging with which transphobia is delivered (Smilges,
2022a). See also Smilges (2022b, 2023).
22Several reviews have shown that a majority of research funding in the field of autism is devoted
to "basic science", including genetics and other "risk factors" (Singh et al., 2009; Krahn and
Fenton, 2012b; Pellicano et al., 2014), although autistic communities have advocated for increased
research on how public services can best meet the needs of autistics (Fletcher-Watson et al., 2017;
den Houting and Pellicano, 2019; Roche et al., 2021).

AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
19
At the same time, if autistics are not members of the moral community, then ad-
vocating for eugenics to eradicate autism may be taken to be defensible (Barnbaum,
2008).
Examining a different line of entailments, if autistics lack a theory of mind, then
if theory of mind is a subset of empathy, as some have claimed (Baron-Cohen,
2002, 2003b, 2009, 2011; Baron-Cohen and Wheelwright, 2004), then it logically
follows that autistics lack empathy (Chapman et al., 2006; Knickmeyer et al., 2006;
Chura et al., 2010; Auyeung et al., 2010a,b; van Honk et al., 2011). If autistics
lack empathy, then they cannot live the "good life"—at least on those accounts of
the good life that require empathy (Nussbaum, 2006). Indeed, some philosophers
have explicitly argued that "living an autistic life is not, ceteris paribus, as good
a human life as that child's life had he not been born autistic" (Barnbaum, 2008,
149). Similarly, if autistics lack a theory of mind, and if theory of mind is one of
the quintessential abilities that makes humans human (Baron-Cohen et al., 1985),
it logically follows that autistics are not fully human.23
Moreover, if autistics lack a theory of mind, a community of autistic persons
is impossible (Barnbaum, 2008).Although some are more obvious or explicit than
others, all of the above claims are equally dehumanising to autistics.24 It should be
clear at this point that much philosophical work on autism falls under ethics, phi-
losophy of mind, philosophy of psychology, or philosophy of medicine and bioethics
(B¨olte and Richman, 2018). That said, the upshot of an analysis of pseudoscientific
approaches to autism research is that there are obvious ways in which the philoso-
phy of science can positively benefit autism research and, indeed, benefit autistics.
Importantly, however, this research must avoid succumbing to the current standard
of research-based violence, which the autistic scholar Monique Botha defines as "a
form of systemic violence perpetuated through societal systems" (Botha, 2021, 4),
such as, for example, the academy.25
8. Conclusion
The theory-of-mind-deficit explanation of autistic behaviour is inadequate as a
model insofar as a failure on tasks intended to measure theory-of-mind abilities
is neither universal amongst nor unique to autistics, and theory-of-mind abilities
lack causal precedence and explanatory power. At the same time, these tests lack
23I am not aware of any philosopher who actually draws this consequence, but it is a logical
entailment had by claims that philosophers do make.
24In this case, dehumanisation can be variously defined as the denial of full humanness to others
(Haslam, 2006), the denial of specific traits which are said to unite all humans or separate humans
from non-human animals (Haslam, 2006), the denial of a group's ability to experience complex
emotions (Leyens et al., 2000), the exclusion of a group from moral boundaries (Opotow, 1990), or
the denial of a group's community or identity (Kelman, 1973). See the discussion in Botha (2021).
25See also the discussion of epistemological violence in Teo (2010).

20
AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
convergent validity, implying that theory of mind (in the context of autism) lacks
construct validity. The results of studies of theory-of-mind abilities often contradict
the popular conception that autistics lack a theory of mind. Taken together, these
facts should uncontroversially suggest that the "science" of theory of mind is bad
science.
Moreover, the theory-of-mind-deficit explanation of autism, I have argued, has all
the hallmarks of a degenerating research programme. These characteristics move the
programme from merely bad science to genuine pseudoscience. To some extent, this
should be unsurprising, insofar as autism, through history, has been no stranger to
pseudoscientific claims—for example, "refrigerator mothers" cause autism (Bettel-
heim, 1967); "vaccines cause autism", etc. There is also a highly predatory industry
predicated on offering cures and treatments for autism, including forcing autistic
children to drink bleach, receive bleach enemas, undergo chelation, or be subjected
to ABA therapy. The pseudoscientific features of the theory-of-mind-deficit expla-
nation of autism are particularly pernicious when we consider that philosophers
often uncritically assume that autistics lack a theory of mind. More than an idle
thought experiment, the repetition of this view by philosophers serves to further
stigmatise and dehumanise autistics while further entrenching violent dominance
hierarchies.
Acknowledgements. This article is part of the research project, Philosophy on
the Spectrum: The Philosophy of Autism and Autistic Philosophy, which is sup-
ported in part by funding from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Coun-
cil. Further information can be found at autphi.github.io. Thanks to audiences at
the Canadian Society for the History and Philosophy of Science (CSHPS 2023) in
Toronto, the Atlantic Regional Philosophers Association (ARPA 2023) in Charlot-
tetown, and the Philosophy Department Colloquium Series at Dalhousie University
(2023) in Halifax. Especial thanks to Amelia Hicks and the NeuroDiving Podcast
(https://NeuroDiving.fm) for an extensive, stimulating discussion about theory of
mind and pseudoscience. Thanks also to Tyler Hildebrand, Cailin O'Connor, Lynn
LaCroix, Duncan McIntosh, Andrew Fenton, Michael Hymers, Emma McClure, and
Mark Fortney for feedback and discussion on early drafts.

AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
21
References
Abell, Frances, Frances Happ´e, and Uta Frith (2000). Do triangles play tricks? Attribution
of mental states to animated shapes in normal and abnormal development. Cognitive
Development, 15(1): 1-16.
Ahmed, Fayeza S. and L. Stephen Miller (2011). Executive function mechanisms of theory
of mind. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 41: 667-678.
Aldridge, Michelle A., Kari R. Stone, Melissa H. Sweeney, and T. G. R. Bower (2000).
Preverbal children with autism understand the intentions of others.
Developmental
Science, 3(3): 294-301.
APA, American Psychiatric Association (1952).
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: DSM-I.
American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC, 1st
edition.
APA, American Psychiatric Association (1958).
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: DSM-II. American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC, 2nd
edition.
APA, American Psychiatric Association (1980).
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: DSM-III. American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC, 3rd
edition.
APA, American Psychiatric Association (1987).
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: DSM-III-R.
American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC,
3rd, revised edition.
APA, American Psychiatric Association (1994).
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: DSM-IV. American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC, 4th
edition.
APA, American Psychiatric Association (2000).
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: DSM-IV-TR. American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC,
4th, text revised edition.
APA, American Psychiatric Association (2013).
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: DSM-5.
American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC, 5th
edition.
Asperger, Hans (1944). Die ,,autistischen psychopathen" im kindesalter. Archiv f¨ur psy-
chiatrie und nervenkrankheiten, 117(1): 76-136.
Auyeung, Bonnie, Simon Baron-Cohen, Emma Ashwin, Rebecca Knickmeyer, Kevin Tay-
lor, and Gerald Hackett (2010a). Fetal testosterone and autistic traits. British Journal
of Psychology, 100(1): 1-22.
Auyeung, Bonnie, Kevin Taylor, Gerald Hackett, and Simon Baron-Cohen (2010b). Foetal
testosterone and autistic traits in 18 to 24-month-old children.
Molecular Autism,
1(11): 1-8.
Bailey, Anthony, Wendy Phillips, and Michael Rutter (1996). Autism: towards an integra-
tion of clinical, genetic, neuropsychological, and neurobiological perspectives. Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 37(1): 89-126.
Barnbaum, Deborah R. (2008). The Ethics of Autism: Among Them, but Not of Them.
Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN.
Baron-Cohen, Simon (1989). The autistic child's theory of mind: a case of specific devel-
opmental delay. The Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 30(2): 285-297.
Baron-Cohen, Simon (1993). From attention-goal psychology to belief-desire psychology:
The development of a theory of mind, and its dysfunction. In Baron-Cohen, Simon,
Helen Tager-Flusberg, and Donald J. Cohen, editors, Understanding Other Minds: Per-
spectives from Autism, pages 59-82. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Baron-Cohen, Simon (1994). How to build a baby that can read minds: Cognitive mech-
anisms in mindreading. Cahiers de Psychologie Cognitive, 13(6): 513-552.

22
AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
Baron-Cohen, Simon (1995). Mindblindness: an Essay on Autism and Theory of Mind.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Baron-Cohen, Simon (2000). Theory of mind and autism: A review. International Review
of Research in Mental Retardation, 23: 169-184.
Baron-Cohen, Simon (2002).
The Extreme Male Brain Theory of Autism.
Trends in
Cognitive Science, 6(6): 248-254.
Baron-Cohen, Simon (2003a). Autism and Asperger Syndrome. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Baron-Cohen, Simon (2003b). The Essential Difference: Male And Female Brains And
The Truth About Autism. Basic Books, New York.
Baron-Cohen, Simon (2006). The hyper-systemizing, assortative mating theory of autism.
Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, 30: 865-872.
Baron-Cohen, Simon (2009). Autism: The Empathizing-Systematizing (E-S) Theory. An-
nals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1156: 68-80.
Baron-Cohen, Simon (2010). Empathizing, systemizing, and the extreme male brain theory
of autism. Progress in Brain Research, 186: 167-175.
Baron-Cohen, Simon (2011). Zero Degrees of Empathy: A New Theory of Human Cruelty.
Penguin, New York.
Baron-Cohen, Simon, Alan M. Leslie, and Uta Frith (1985). Does the Autistic Child Have
a 'Theory of Mind?'. Cognition, 21(1): 37-46.
Baron-Cohen, Simon, Michelle O'Riordan, Rosie Jones, Valerie Stone, and Kate Plaisted
(1999). A new test of social sensitivity: Detection of faux pas in normal children and
children with Asperger syndrome.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
29: 407-418.
Baron-Cohen, S., H. Tager-Flusberg, and D. J. Cohen (2000). Understanding other Minds:
Perspectives from Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience. Oxford University Press, Ox-
ford.
Baron-Cohen, Simon and Sally Wheelwright (2004). The empathy quotient: An investi-
gation of adults with Asperger syndrome or high functioning autism, and normal sex
differences. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 34(2): 163-175.
Baron-Cohen, Simon, Sally Wheelwright, Jacqueline Hill, Yogini Raste, , and Ian Plumb
(2001). The 'Reading the Mind in the Eyes' Test revised version: a study with normal
adults, and adults with Asperger syndrome or high-functioning autism. The Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 42(2): 241-251.
Bauminger, Nirit and Connie Kasari (1999).
Brief report: Theory of mind in high-
functioning children with autism.
Journal of autism and developmental disorders,
29: 81-86.
Bender, Lauretta (1954). Current research in childhood schizophrenia. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 110(11): 855-856.
Benn, Piers (1999). Freedom, Resentment, and the Psychopath. Philosophy, Psychiatry,
& Psychology, 6(1): 29-39.
Benson, Glenis, Leonard Abbeduto, Katherine Short, Jill B. Nuccio, and Fay Maas (1993).
Development of theory of mind in individuals with mental retardation. American Jour-
nal on Mental Retardation, 98(3): 427-433.
Berger, Natalie I. and Brooke Ingersoll (2014). A further investigation of goal-directed
intention understanding in young children with autism spectrum disorders. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 44: 3204-3214.
Bettelheim, Bruno (1967). The Empty fortress: Infantile Autism and the Birth of the Self.
Simon and Schuster, New York.
Beversdorf, D. Q., J. M. Anderson, S. E. Manning, S. L. Anderson, R. E. Nordgren,
G. J. Felopulos, S. E. Nadeau, K. M. Heilman, and M. L. Bauman (1998). The effect
of semantic and emotional context on written recall for verbal language in high func-
tioning adults with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery &

AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
23
Psychiatry, 65(5): 685-692.
Bishop, D. V. M. (1989). Autism, Asperger's Syndrome and semantic-pragmatic disorder:
where are the boundaries? British Journal of Disorders of Communication, 24(2): 107-
121.
Blackburn, J., K. Gottschewski, Elsa George, and Niki L. (2019).
A discussion about
theory of mind: From an autistic perspective from autism europe's congress 2000. Au-
tonomy, the Critical Journal of Interdisciplinary Autism Studies, 1(6).
Bloom, Paul and Tim P. German (2000). Two reasons to abandon the false belief task as
a test of theory of mind. Cognition, 77: B25-B31.
B¨olte, Sven and Kenneth A. Richman (2018). Hard talk: Does autism need philosophy.
Autism, 23(1): 3-7.
Bolton, P., H. Macdonald, A. Pickles, P. Rios, S. Goode, M. Crowson, A. Bailey, and
M. Rutter (1994).
A case-control family history study of autism.
Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 35(5): 877-900.
Bora, E., S. Vahip, A. S. Gonul, F. Akdeniz, M. Alkan, M. Ogut, and A. Eryavuz (2005).
Evidence for theory of mind deficits in euthymic patients with bipolar disorder. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 110(116): 110-116.
Botha, Monique (2021). Academic, activist, or advocate? angry, entangled, and emerg-
ing: A critical reflection on autism knowledge production.
Frontiers in Psychology,
12(727542): 1-12.
Botha, Monique, Jacqueline Hanlon, and Gemma Louise Williams (2021). Does language
matter? identity-first versus person-first language use in autism research: A response to
vivanti. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 53: 870-878.
Boucher, J. (1996). What could possibly explain autism? In Carruthers, Peter and Peter K.
Smith, editors, Theories of Theories of Mind, pages 223-241. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Boucher, Jill (2012). Putting theory of mind in its place: psychological explanations of
the socio-emotional-communicative impairments in autistic spectrum disorder. Autism,
16(3): 226-246.
Bradshaw, Pia, Claire Pickett, Mieke L van Driel, Katie Brooker, and Anna Urbanowicz
(2021). 'autistic' or 'with autism'? why the way general practitioners view and talk
about autism matters. Australian Journal of General Practice, 50(3): 104-108.
Brown, R., R. Hobson, A. Lee, and J. Stevenson (1997). 'are there 'autistic-like' features in
congenitally blind children?'. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 38: 693-703.
Buitelaar, Jan K., Marleen van der Wees, Hanna Swaab-Barneveld, and Rutger Jan van
der Gaag (1999). Verbal memory and performance iq predict theory of mind and emo-
tion recognition ability in children with autistic spectrum disorders and in psychiatric
control children. The Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines,
40(6): 869-881.
Caillies, S., A. Hody, and A. Calmus (2012). Theory of mind and irony comprehension in
children with cerebral palsy. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 33: 1380-1388.
Carpenter, Malinda, Bruce F. Pennington, and Sally J. Rogers (2001). Understanding
of others' intentions in children with autism.
Journal of autism and developmental
disorders, 31: 589-599.
Carruthers, Peter (1996). Autism as mind-blindness: An elaboration and partial defence.
In Carruthers, Peter and Peter K. Smith, editors, Theories of Theories of Mind, pages
257-273. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Channon, Shelley, David Lagnado, Sian Fitzpatrick, Helena Drury, and Isabelle Taylor
(2011). Judgments of cause and blame: Sensitivity to intentionality in asperger's syn-
drome. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 41: 1534-1542.
Chapman, Emma, Simon Baron-Cohen, Bonnie Auyeung, Rebecca Knickmeyer, Kevin
Taylor, and Gerald Hackett (2006). Fetal testosterone and empathy: evidence from the
empathy quotient (eq) and the "reading the mind in the eyes" test. Soc. Neurosci.,

24
AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
1(2): 135-148.
Charman, Tony (2000). Theory of mind and the early diagnosis of autism. In Baron-
Cohen, S., H. Tager-Flusberg, and D. J. Cohen, editors, Understanding other minds:
Perspectives from developmental cognitive neuroscience, pages 422-441. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, Oxford.
Charman, Tony and Adam Campbell (1997). Reliability of theory of mind task perfor-
mance by individuals with a learning disability: A research note.
Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 38(6): 725-730.
Chen, Kuan-Wei, Shih-Chieh Lee, Hsin-Yu Chiang, Ya-Cing Syu, Xiao-Xuan Yu, and
Ching-Lin Hsieh (2017).
Psychometric properties of three measures assessing ad-
vanced theory of mind: Evidence from people with schizophrenia. Psychiatry Research,
257: 490-496.
Chura, Lindsay R., Michael V. Lombardo, Emma Ashwin, Bonnie Auyeung, Bhismadev
Chakrabarti, Edward T. Bullmore, and Simon Baron-Cohen (2010).
Organizational
effects of fetal testosterone on human corpus callosum size and asymmetry. Psychoneu-
roendocrinology, 35(1): 122-132.
Cole, Eleanor J., Katie E. Slocombe, and Nick E. Barraclough (2018). Abilities to explicitly
and implicitly infer intentions from actions in adults with autism spectrum disorder.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 48: 1712-1726.
Colombi, Costanza, Kristin Liebal, Michael Tomasello, Gregory Young, Felix Warneken,
and Sally J. Rogers (2009). Examining correlates of cooperation in autism: Imitation,
joint attention, and understanding intentions. Autism, 13(2): 143-163.
Cornish, K., J. A. Burack, A. Rahman, F. Munir, N. Russo, and C. Grant (2005). Theory
of mind deficits in children with fragile x syndrome. Journal of Intellectual Disability
Research, 49: 372-378.
Crompton, Catherine J., Sonny Hallett, Danielle Ropar, Emma Flynn, and Sue Fletcher-
Watson (2020a). 'i never realised everybody felt as happy as i do when i am around
autistic people': A thematic analysis of autistic adults' relationships with autistic and
neurotypical friends and family. Autism, 24(6): 1438-1448.
Crompton, Catherine J., Danielle Ropar, Claire V. M. Evans-Williams, Emma G. Flynn,
and Sue Fletcher-Watson (2020b). Autistic peer-to-peer information transfer is highly
effective. Autism, 24(7): 1704-1712.
Crompton, Catherine J., Martha Sharp, Harriet Axbey, Sue Fletcher-Watson, Emma G.
Flynn, and Danielle Ropar (2020c). Neurotype-matching, but not being autistic, in-
fluences self and observer ratings of interpersonal rapport.
Frontiers in Psychology,
11: 586171.
Dahlgren, Sven Olof (2002). Why does the bus stop when I am not getting off? How do
children with autism, Asperger syndrome, and dysfunction in attention motor control
and perception (DAMP) conceptualize the surrounding world? PhD thesis, Goteborg
University.
Dahlgren, Sven Olof and Anegen Trillingsgaard (1996). Theory of mind in non-retarded
children with autism and asperger's syndrome: A research note. Journal of Child Psy-
chology and Psychiatry, 37(6): 759-763.
Davis, Rachael and Catherine J. Crompton (2021). What do new findings about social
interaction in autistic adults mean for neurodevelopmental research? Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 16(3): 649-653.
Dawson, G. and A. Adams (1984). Imitation and social responsiveness in autistic children.
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 12: 209-225.
den Houting, Jacquiline and Elizabeth Pellicano (2019). A portfolio analysis of autism
research funding in australia, 2008-2017. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disor-
ders, 49: 4400-4408.
Dennett, Daniel C. (1978). Beliefs about beliefs. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
4: 568-570.

AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
25
Duval, C´eline, Pascale Piolino, Alexandre Bejanin, Francis Eustache, and B´eatrice Des-
granges (2011). Age effects on different components of theory of mind. Consciousness
and cognition, 20(3): 627-642.
Falck-Ytter, Terje (2010). Young children with autism spectrum disorder use predictive
eye movements in action observation. Biology letters, 6(3): 375-378.
Fitzpatrick, Paula, Rachel Diorio, Michael J. Richardson, and R. C. Schmidt (2013). Dy-
namical methods for evaluating the time-dependent unfolding of social coordination in
children with autism. Frontiers in integrative neuroscience, 7: 21.
Fletcher-Watson, Sue, Fabio Apicella, Bonnie Auyeung, Stepanka Beranova, Frederique
Bonnet-Brilhault, Ricardo Canal-Bedia, Tony Charman, Natasha Chericoni, Inˆes C
Concei¸c˜ao, Kim Davies, Teresa Farroni, Marie Gomot, Emily Jones, Anett Kaale,
Katarzyna Kapica, Rafal Kawa, Anneli Kylli¨ainen, Kenneth Larsen, Jeremy Lefort-
Besnard, Joelle Malvy, Sara Manso De Dios, Silvana Markovska-Simoska, Inbal Millo,
Natercia Miranda, Greg Pasco, Ewa Pisula, Marija Raleva, Bernadette Rog´e, Erica
Salomone, Synnve Schjolberg, Przemys law Tomalski, Astrid M Vicente, and Nurit Yir-
miya (2017). Attitudes of the autism community to early autism research. Autism,
21(1): 61-74.
Forgeot d'Arc, Baudouin, Fabien Vinckier, Ma¨el Lebreton, Isabelle Souli`eres, Laurent
Mottron, and Mathias Pessiglione (2016). Mimetic desire in autism spectrum disorder.
Molecular Autism, 7(1): 1-6.
Frith, Uta (1970). Studies in pattern detection ii: Reproduction and production of colour
sequences. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 10(3): 120-135.
Frith, Uta (1972). Cognitive mechanisms in autism: Experiments with colour and tone
sequence production. Journal of Autism and Childhood Schizophrenia, 10(3): 160-173.
Frith, Uta (1989). Autism: Explaining the Enigma. Blackwell, Oxford.
Frith, Uta (1991). Asperger and his syndrome. In Frith, Uta, editor, Autism and Asperger
syndrome, pages 1-36. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Frith, Uta (1998). What autism teaches us about communication. Logopedics Phoniatrics
Vocology, 23(2): 51-58.
Frith, Uta (2001). Mind blindness and the brain in autism. Neuron, 32(6): 969-979.
Frith, Uta (2003). Autism: Explaining the Enigma. Blackwell, Oxford, 2 edition.
Frith, Uta (2008).
Autism: A Very Short Introduction.
Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Frith, Uta and Francesca Happ´e (1994). Autism: Beyond 'theory of mind'. Cognition,
50(3): 115-132.
Frith, Uta and Francesca Happ´e (1999). Theory of mind and self-consciousness: What is
it like to be autistic? Mind & language, 14(1): 82-89.
Frith, Uta, Francesca Happ´e, and F. Siddons (1994).
Autism and theory of mind in
everyday life. Trends in Neurosciences, 3: 108-124.
Frith, Uta, J. Morton, and Alan M. Leslie (1991).
The cognitive basis of a biological
disorder: Autism. Trends in Neurosciences, 14: 433-438.
Fu, Jack M., F. Kyle Satterstrom, Minshi Peng, Harrison Brand, Ryan L. Collins, Shan
Dong, Brie Wamsley, Lambertus Klei, Lily Wang, Stephanie P. Hao, Christine R.
Stevens, Caroline Cusick, Mehrtash Babadi, Eric Banks, Brett Collins, Sheila Dodge,
Stacey B. Gabriel, Laura Gauthier, Samuel K. Lee, Lindsay Liang, Alicia Ljungdahl,
Behrang Mahjani, Laura Sloofman, Andrey N. Smirnov, Mafalda Barbosa, Catalina
Betancur, Alfredo Brusco, Brian H. Y. Chung, Edwin H. Cook, Michael L. Cuccaro,
Enrico Domenici, Giovanni Battista Ferrero, J. Jay Gargus, Gail E. Herman, Irva Hertz-
Picciotto, Patricia Maciel, Dara S. Manoach, Maria Rita Passos-Bueno, Antonio M.
Persico, Alessandra Renieri, James S. Sutcliffe, Flora Tassone, Elisabetta Trabetti,
Gabriele Campos, Simona Cardaropoli, Diana Carli, Marcus C. Y. Chan, Chiara Fall-
erini, Elisa Giorgio, Ana Cristina Girardi, Emily Hansen-Kiss, So Lun Lee, Carla Lintas,

26
AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
Yunin Ludena, Rachel Nguyen, Lisa Pavinato, Margaret Pericak-Vance, Isaac N. Pes-
sah, Rebecca J. Schmidt, Moyra Smith, Claudia I. S. Costa, Slavica Trajkova, Jaqueline
Y. T. Wang, Mullin H. C. Yu, The Autism Sequencing Consortium (ASC), Broad In-
stitute Center for Common Disease Genomics (Broad-CCDG), iPSYCH BROAD Con-
sortium, David J. Cutler, Silvia De Rubeis, Joseph D. Buxbaum, Mark J. Daly, Bernie
Devlin, Kathryn Roeder, Stephan J. Sanders, and Michael E. Talkowski (2022). Rare
coding variation provides insight into the genetic architecture and phenotypic context
of autism. Nature, 54: 1320-3131.
Fuller, Steve (1985). The demarcation of science: a problem whose demise has been greatly
exaggerated. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 66: 329-341.
Gallese, Vittorio and Corrado Sinigaglia (2011).
What is so special about embodied
simulation? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15(11): 512-519.
Georgia General Assembly (2023). Senate bill 140. LC 33 9348 https://www.legis.ga.
gov/api/legislation/document/20232024/214237.
Gernsbacher, Morton Ann (2018).
Critical review of autism and theory and mind: A
technical report. Technical report, Open Science Framework.
Gernsbacher, Morton Ann and Jennifer L. Frymiare (2005). Does the Autistic Brain Lack
Core Modules? Journal of Developmental and Learning Disorders, 9: 3-16.
Gernsbacher, Morton Ann and Melanie Yergeau (2019). Empirical Failures of the Claim
That Autistic People Lack a Theory of Mind. Archives of Scientific Psychology, 7: 102-
118.
Gl¨uer, Kathrin and Peter Pagin (2003). Meaning theory and autistic speakers. Mind &
Language, 18(1): 23-51.
Gooding, Diane Carol and Madeline Johnson Pflum (2011). Theory of mind and psycho-
metric schizotypy. Psychiatry Research, 188(2): 217-223.
Goodman, Robert (1989).
Infantile autism: A syndrome of multiple primary deficits?
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 19: 409-424.
Green, Adam E., Lauren Kenworthy, Natalie M. Gallagher, Ligia Antezana, Maya G.
Mosner, Samantha Krieg, Katherina Dudley, Allison Ratto, and Benjamin E. Yerys
(2017). Social analogical reasoning in school-aged children with autism spectrum dis-
order and typically developing peers. Autism, 21(4): 403-411.
Green, S., L. Pring, and J. Swettenham (2004). An investigation of first-order false belief
understanding of children with congenital profound visual impairment. British Journal
of Developmental Psychology, 22: 1-17.
Hansson, Sven Ove (2021). Science and Pseudo-Science. In Zalta, Edward N., editor, The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University,
Fall 2021 edition.
Happ´e, Francesca (2000). Parts and wholes, meaning and minds: Central coherence and
its relation to theory of mind. In Baron-Cohen, Simon, Helen Tager-Flusberg, , and
Donald J. Cohen, editors, Understanding Other Minds: Perspectives from Developmental
Cognitive Neuroscience, pages 203-221. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2 edition.
Happ´e, Francesca G. and R. Booth (2008). The power of the positive: Revisiting weak
coherence in autism spectrum disorders. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
61: 50-63.
Happ´e, Francesca G. and Uta Frith (2008). The weak coherence account: detail-focused
cognitive style in autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 36: 5-25.
Happ´e, Francesca G. E. (1994a). An advanced test of theory of mind: Understanding of
story characters' thoughts and feelings by able autistic, mentally handicapped, and nor-
mal children and adults. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 24(2): 129-
154.
Happ´e, Francesca G. E. (1994b). Annotation: Current psychological theories of autism:
The 'theory of mind' account and rival theories.
Journal of Child Psychology and

AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
27
Psychiatry, 35: 215-229.
Happ´e, Francesca G. E. (1995). The role of age and verbal ability in the theory of mind
task performance of subjects with autism. Child Development, 66: 843-855.
Haslam, Nick (2006).
Dehumanization: an integrative review.
Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 10(3): 252-264.
Hermelin, Beate and Neil O'Connor (1967).
Remembering of words by psychotic and
subnormal children. British Journal of Psychology, 58: 213-218.
Hermelin, Beate and Neil O'Connor (1970). Psychological Experiments with Autistic Chil-
dren. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Hill, E. L. (2004). Evaluating the theory of executive dysfunction of autism. Developmental
Review, 24: 189-233.
Hobson, R. P. (1989).
Beyond cognition: A theory of autism.
In Dawson, Geraldine,
editor, Autism: Nature, Diagnosis, and Treatment, pages 22-48. The Guilford Press,
New York.
Hobson, R. P. (1993). Understanding persons: The role of affect. In Dawson, Geraldine,
editor, Understanding Other Minds: Perspectives from Autism, pages 204-227. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Hobson, R. P. (2002). The Cradle of Thought. Pan Macmillan, London.
Hollocks, Matthew J., Catherine R. G. Jones, Andrew Pickles, Gillian Baird, Francesca
Happ´e, Tony Charman, and Emily Simonoff (2014). The association between social cog-
nition and executive functioning and symptoms of anxiety and depression in adolescents
with autism spectrum disorders. Autism Research, 7(2): 216-228.
Hubert, B., B. Wicker, Derek G. Moore, E. Monfardini, H. Duverger, D. Da Fonseca,
and C. Deruelle (2007). Brief report: recognition of emotional and non-emotional bio-
logical motion in individuals with autistic spectrum disorders. Journal of autism and
developmental disorders, 37: 1386-1392.
Hughes, Claire (1998). Executive function in preschoolers: Links with theory of mind and
verbal ability. British journal of developmental psychology, 16(2): 233-253.
Hughes, C. and S. Leekam (2004).
What are the links between theory of mind and
social relations? review, reflections and new directions for studies of typical and atypical
development. Social Development, 13: 590-619.
Hughes, C. and J. Russell (1993). Autistic children's difficulty with mental disengagement
from an object: Its implications for theories of autism.
Developmental Psychology,
29: 498-510.
Kanner, Leo (1943). Autistic Disturbances of Affective Contact. Nervous Child, 2: 217-
250.
Kelman, Herbert G. (1973). Violence without moral restraint: reflections on the dehu-
manization of victims and victimizers. Journal of Social Issues, 29(4): 25-61.
Kerr, Sharyn and Kevin Durkin (2004).
Understanding of thought bubbles as mental
representations in children with autism: Implications for theory of mind. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 34: 637-648.
Klin, A. and F. Volkmar (1993). The development of individuals with autism: Implications
for the theory of mind hypothesis. In Dawson, Geraldine, editor, Understanding Other
Minds: Perspectives from Autism, pages 317-331. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Klin, A., F. R. Volkmar, and S. S. Sparrow (1992). Autistic social dysfunction: Some lim-
itations of the theory of mind hypothesis. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
33: 861-876.
Knickmeyer, Rebecca, Simon Baron-Cohen, Peter Raggatt, Kevin Taylor, and Gerald
Hackett (2006). Fetal testosterone and empathy. Hormones and Behavior, 49: 282-292.
Krahn, Timothy M. and Andrew Fenton (2012a).
The extreme male brain theory of
autism and the potential adverse effects for boys and girls with autism.
Bioethical
Inquiry, 9: 93-103.

28
AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
Krahn, Timothy M. and Andrew Fenton (2012b). Funding priorities: Autism and the need
for a more balanced research agenda in canada. Public Health Ethics, 5(3): 296-310.
Lakatos, Imre (1970). Falsification and the methodology of research program. In Lakatos,
Imre and Alan Musgrave, editors, Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, pages 91-
197. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Leslie, Alan M. (1987).
Pretense and representation: The origins of 'theory of mind'.
Psychological Review, 94: 412-426.
Leslie, Alan M. (1991). The theory of mind impairment in autism: Evidence for a modular
mechanism of development? In Whiten, A., editor, Natural Theories of Mind: Evolution,
Development and Simulation of Everyday Mindreading, pages 63-78. Blackwell, Oxford.
Leslie, Alan M. (1992). Pretense, autism, and the theory-of-mind module. Current direc-
tions in psychological science, 1(1): 18-21.
Leyens, Jacques-Philippe, Paola M. Paladino, Ramon Rodriguez-Torres, Jeroen Vaes,
St´ephanie Demoulin, Armando Rodriguez-Perez, and Ruth Gaunt (2000). The emo-
tional side of prejudice: the attribution of secondary emotions to ingroups and out-
groups. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 4(2): 186-197.
Li, Tianbi, Jean Decety, Xiaoyi Hu, Jiao Li, Jinling Lin, and Li Yi (2019). Third-party
sociomoral evaluations in children with autism spectrum disorder. Child development,
90(5): e584-e597.
Li, Xiaoming, Kai Wang, Fan Wang, Qian Tao, Yu Xie, and Qi Cheng (2013). Aging of the-
ory of mind: The influence of educational level and cognitive processing. International
Journal of Psychology, 48(4): 715-727.
Liebal, Kristin, Costanza Colombi, Sally J. Rogers, Felix Warneken, and Michael
Tomasello (2008). Helping and cooperation in children with autism. Journal of autism
and developmental disorders, 38: 224-238.
Lo, S. T., E. Siemensma, P. Collin, and A. Hokken-Koelega (2013). Impaired theory of
mind and symptoms of autism spectrum disorder in children with prader-willi syndrome.
Research in Developmental Disabilities, 34: 2764-2773.
Loukusa, S., L. M¨akinen, S. Kuusikko-Gauffin, H. Ebeling, and I. Moilanen (2014). Theory
of mind and emotion recognition skills in children with specific language impairment,
autism spectrum disorder and typical development: Group differences and connection
to knowledge of grammatical morphology, word-finding abilities and verbal working
memory. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 49: 498-507.
Lukito, Steve, Catherine R. G. Jones, Andrew Pickles, Gillian Baird, Francesca Happ´e,
Tony Charman, and Emily Simonoff (2017). Specificity of executive function and theory
of mind performance in relation to attention-deficit/hyperactivity symptoms in autism
spectrum disorders. Molecular Autism, 8: 1-13.
McAleer, Phil, Jim W. Kay, Frank E. Pollick, and M. D. Rutherford (2011). Intention
perception in high functioning people with autism spectrum disorders using animacy
displays derived from human actions. Journal of autism and developmental disorders,
41: 1053-1063.
Miller, Carol A. (2001).
False belief understanding in children with specific language
impairment. Journal of communication disorders, 34(1-2): 73-86.
Milligan, Karen, Janet Wilde Astington, and Lisa Ain Dack (2007). Language and theory
of mind: Meta-analysis of the relation between language ability and false-belief under-
standing. Child Development, 78(2): 622-646.
Milton, Damian, Emine Gurbuz, , and Beatriz L´opez (2022). The 'double empathy prob-
lem': Ten years on. Autism, 26(8): 1901-1903.
Milton, Damian E. M. (2012). On the ontological status of autism: the 'double empathy
problem'. Disability & Society, 27(6): 883-887.
Minshew, N. J., G. Goldstein, L. R. Muenz, and J. B. Payton (1992). Neuropsycholog-
ical functioning in nonmentally retarded autistic individuals. Journal of Clinical and
Experimental Neuropsychology, 14: 749-761.

AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
29
Minshew, N. J., G. Goldstein, and D. J. Siegel (1997). Neuropsychologic functioning in
autism: Profile of a complex information processing disorder. Journal of the Interna-
tional Neuropsychological Society, 3: 303-316.
Minter, M., R. Hobson, and M. Bishop (1998). Congenital visual impairment and 'theory
of mind'. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 16: 183-196.
Moran, Joseph M., Liane L. Young, Rebecca Saxe, Su Mei Lee, Daniel O'Young, Pene-
lope L. Mavros, , and John D. Gabrieli (2011).
Impaired theory of mind for moral
judgment in high-functioning autism. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
108(7): 2688-2692.
Morton, J. and Uta Frith (1995a). Causal modelling: A structural approach to develop-
mental psychopathology, pages 357-390. Wiley, New York.
Morton, J. and Uta Frith (1995b). Language, Brain, and Cognitive Development: Essays
in Honor of Jacques Mehler, pages 263-278. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Mundy, P. and M. Sigman (1989). Specifying the nature of the social impairment in autism,
pages 3-21. Guilford Press, New York.
Murray, Dinah, Mike Lesser, and Wenn Lawson (2005). Attention, monotropism and the
diagnostic criteria for autism. Autism, 9(2): 139-156.
Murray, Fergus (2018). Me and monotropism: A unified theory of autism. The British
Psychological Society, Nov.(30).
Norbury, C. F. (2005). The relationship between theory of mind and metaphor: Evidence
from children with language impairment and autistic spectrum disorder. British Journal
of Developmental Psychology, 23: 383-399.
Nussbaum, Martha C. (2006). Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality, Species Mem-
bership. The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Opotow, Susan (1990). Moral exclusion and injustice: an introduction. Journal of Social
Issues, 46(1): 1-20.
Ornitz, E. M. and E. R. Ritvo (1968). Perceptual inconstancy in early infantile autism.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 18: 76-98.
Oswald, Donald P. and Thomas H. Ollendick (1989). Role taking and social competence
in autism and mental retardation.
Journal of autism and developmental disorders,
19(1): 119-127.
Ozonoff, Sally, Bruce F. Pennington, and Sally J. Rogers (1991a).
Executive function
deficits in high-functioning autistic individuals: Relationship to theory of mind. Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 32: 1081-1105.
Ozonoff, Sally, Sally J. Rogers, and Bruce F. Pennington (1991b). Asperger's syndrome:
Evidence of an empirical distinction from high-functioning autism. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 32(7): 1107-1122.
Payne, J. M., M. Porter, N. A. Pride, and K. N. North (1995). Theory of mind in children
with Neurofibromatosis Type 1. Neuropsychology, 30: 439-448.
Pellicano, Elizabeth (2011). Psychological models of autism: An overview. In Roth, Ilona
and Payam Rezaie, editors, Researching the Autism Spectrum: Contemporary Perspec-
tives, pages 219-265. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Pellicano, Elizabeth, Adam Dinsmore, and Tony Charman (2014). What should autism
research focus upon? community views and priorities from the united kingdom. Autism,
18(7): 756-770.
Pennington, B. F. and S. Ozonoff (1996). Executive functions and developmental psy-
chopathology. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 37: 51-87.
Pennington, Bruce F., Sally J. Rogers, Loisa Bennetto, Elizabeth McMahon Griffith,
D. Taffy Reed, and Vivian Shyu (1997). Validity tests of the executive dysfunction
hypothesis of autism.
In Russell, James, editor, Autism as an Executive Disorder,
pages 143-178. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Peterson, Candida C. and Michael Siegal (1995). Deafness, conversation and theory of
mind. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 36: 459-474.

30
AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
Peterson, Candida C. and Michael Siegal (1999). Representing inner worlds: Theory of
mind in autistic, deaf, and normal hearing children. Psychological Science, 10: 126-129.
Piven, Joseph, Pat Palmer, Dinah Jacobi, Debra Childress, and Stephan Arndt (1997).
Broader autism phenotype: evidence from a family history study of multiple-incidence
autism families. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154: 185-190.
Ponnet, Koen, Ann Buysse, Herbert Roeyers, and Kim De Corte (2005). Empathic ac-
curacy in adults with a pervasive developmental disorder during an unstructured con-
versation with a typically developing stranger. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 35: 585-600.
Popper, Karl (1962).
Conjectures and refutations. The growth of scientific knowledge.
Basic Books, New York.
Premack, David and Guy Woodruff (1978). Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind?
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1(4): 515-526.
Prior, Margot, Bronwyn Dahlstrom, and Tracie-Lee Squires (1990). Autistic children's
knowledge of thinking and feeling states in other people. Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry, 31(4): 587-601.
Pugh, Zachary H., Sanghyun Choo, Joseph C. Leshin, Kristen A. Lindquist, and Chang S
Nam (2021). Emotion depends on context, culture and their interaction: evidence from
effective connectivity. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 17(2): 206-217.
Rasmussen, C., K. Wyper, and V. Talwar (2009). The relation between theory of mind
and executive functions in children with fetal alcohol spectrum disorders. The Canadian
Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 16: e370-e380.
Raud, T., M. L. Kaldoja, and A. Kolk (2015). Relationship between social competence and
neurocognitive performance in children with epilepsy. Epilepsy & Behavior, 52: 93-101.
Reed, Taffy and Candida Peterson (1990).
A comparative study of autistic subjects'
performance at two levels of visual and cognitive perspective taking. Journal of Autism
and Developmental Disorders, 20(4): 555-568.
Reidy, R. E., R. G. Ross, and S. K. Hunter (2013).
Theory of mind development is
impaired in 4-year-old children with prenatal exposure to maternal tobacco smoking.
International Neuropsychiatric Disease Journal, 1: 24-34.
Ridley, Rosalind (2019). Some difficulties behind the concept of the 'extreme male brain' in
autism research. a theoretical review. Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders, 57: 19-
27.
Rippon, Gina (2020). Gender and Our Brains: How New Neuroscience Explodes the Myths
of the Male and Female Minds. Vintage Books, New York.
Roche, Laura, Dawn Adams, and Megan Clark (2021). Research priorities of the autism
community: A systematic review of key stakeholder perspectives. Autism, 25(2): 336-
248.
Russell, James and Elisabeth L. Hill (2001). Action-monitoring and intention reporting
in children with autism. The Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied
Disciplines, 42(3): 317-328.
Russell, P. A., J. A. Hosie, C. D. Gray, C. Scott, N. Hunter, J. S. Banks, and M. C.
Macaulay (1998). The development of theory of mind in deaf children. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 39: 903-910.
Russo, Natalie, Tara Flanagan, Grace Iarocci, Darlene Berringer, Philip David Zelazo, and
Jacob A. Burack (1998). Deconstructing executive deficits among persons with autism:
Implications for cognitive neuroscience. Brain and Cognition, 65(1): 77-86.
Rutter, Michael (1968).
Concepts of autism: a review of research.
Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 9: 1-25.
Rutter, Michael (1983). Cognitive deficits in the pathogenesis of autism. journal of child
psychology and psychiatry. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 24: 513-531.
Saltzman, Jennifer, Esther Strauss, Michael Hunter, and Sarah Archibald (2000). Theory
of mind and executive functions in normal human aging and parkinson's disease. Journal

AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
31
of the International Neuropsychological Society, 6(7): 781-788.
Sample, Ruth (2013). Autism and the extreme male brain. In Anderson, Jami L. and
Simon Cushing, editors, The Philosophy of Autism, pages 73-101. Rowman & Littlefield,
Plymouth.
Scherzer, Peter, Edith Leveill´e, Andr´e Achim, Emilie Boisseau, and Emmanuel Stip (2012).
A study of theory of mind in paranoid schizophrenia: a theory or many theories? Fron-
tiers in Psychology, 3: 432.
Sebanz, Natalie, G¨unther Knoblich, Luitgard Stumpf, and Wolfgang Prinz (2005). Far
from action-blind: Representation of others' actions in individuals with autism. Cogni-
tive Neuropsychology, 22(3-4): 433-454.
Sinclair, Jim (2013). Why I dislike person first language. Autonomy, the Critical Journal
of Interdisciplinary Autism Studies, 1(2). Originally published on the author's website,
1999.
Singh, Jennifer, Judy Illes, Laura Lazzeroni, and Joachim Hallmayer (2009). Trends in us
autism research funding. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 39(5): 788-
795.
Slade, Lance and Ted Ruffman (2005). How language does (and does not) relate to theory
of mind: A longitudinal study of syntax, semantics, working memory and false belief.
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 23: 117-141.
Smilges, J. Logan (2022a). Neurotrans: Thorazine, hiv, and marsha p. Transgender Studies
Quarterly, 9(4): 634-652.
Smilges, J. Logan (2022b). Queer Silence: On Disability and Rhetorical Absence. Univer-
sity of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
Smilges, J. Logan (2023). Crip Negativity. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
https://manifold.umn.edu/projects/crip-negativity.
Spek, Annelies A., Evert M. Scholte, and Ina A. Van Berckelaer-Onnes (2010). Theory of
mind in adults with hfa and asperger syndrome. Journal of autism and developmental
disorders, 40: 280-289.
Ssucharewa, Grunya E. (1926). Die schizoiden psychopathien im kindesalter. Monatsschrift
f¨ur Psychiatrie und Neurologie, 60(3-4): 235-247.
Taboas, Amanda, Karla Doepke, and Corinne Zimmerman (2022). Preferences for identity-
first versus person-first language in a us sample of autism stakeholders.
Autism,
27(2): 565-570.
Tager-Flusberg, Helen (2001). A reexamination of the theory of mind hypothesis of autism.
In Burack, Jacob A., Tony Charman, Nurit Yurmiya, and Philip R. Zelazo, editors,
The Development of Autism: Perspectives from Theory and Research, pages 173-193.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ.
Tager-Flusberg, Helen (2007). Evaluating the theory-of-mind hypothesis of autism. Cur-
rent Directions in Psychological Science, 16(1): 311-315.
Teo, Thomas (2010). What is epistemological violence in the empirical social sciences?
Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 4(5): 295-303.
van Honk, Jack, Dennis J. Schuttera, Peter A. Bosa, Anne-Wil Kruijtc, Eef G. Lentjesd,
and Simon Baron-Cohen (2011). Testosterone administration impairs cognitiveempa-
thy in women depending on second-to-fourthdigit ratio. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108(8): 3448-3452.
Vetter, Nora C., Kristina Leipold, Matthias Kliegel, Louise H. Phillips, and Mareike Alt-
gassen (2013). Ongoing development of social cognition in adolescence. Child Neuropsy-
chology, 19(6): 615-629.
Vivanti, Giacomo, Carolyn McCormick, Gregory S. Young, Floridette Abucayan, Naomi
Hatt, Aparna Nadig, Sally Ozonoff, and Sally J. Rogers (2011). Intact and impaired
mechanisms of action understanding in autism. Developmental psychology, 47(3): 841.
Volkmar, F. R., S. S. Sparrow, D. Goudreau, D. V. Cicchetti, R. Paul, and D. J. Cohen
(1987). Social deficits in autism: An operational approach using the vineland adaptive

32
AUTISM & THE PSEUDOSCIENCE OF MIND
behavior scales. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
26: 156-161.
Walker, Nick (2021). Neuroqueer Heresies: Notes on the Neurodiversity Paradigm, Autistic
Empowerment, and Postnormal Possibilities. Autonomous Press, Fort Worth, TX.
Warren, Mary Anne (1973).
On the moral and legal status of abortion.
The Monist,
57(4): 43-61.
Waters, C. Kenneth (2019). Presidential address, psa 2016: An epistemology of scientific
practice. Philosophy of Science, 86(4): 585-611.
White, Sarah, Elisabeth Hill, Francesca Happ´e, and Uta Frith (2009).
Revisiting the
strange stories: Revealing mentalizing impairments in autism.
Child Development,
80(4): 1097-1117.
White, Sarah J., Devorah Coniston, Rosannagh Rogers, and Uta Frith (2011). Developing
the frith-happ´e animations: A quick and objective test of theory of mind for adults with
autism. Autism Research, 4(2): 149-154.
Wilson, C. Ellie, Francesca Happ´e, Sally J. Wheelwright, Christine Ecker, Michael V.
Lombardo, Patrick Johnston, Eileen Daly, Clodagh M. Murphy, Debbie Spain, Meng-
Chuan Lai, Bhismadev Chakrabarti, Disa A. Sauter, MRC AIMS Consortium, Simon
Baron-Cohen, and Declan G. M. Murphy (2014). The neuropsychology of male adults
with high-functioning autism or asperger syndrome. Autism Research, 7(5): 568-581.
Wimmer, Heinz and Josef Perner (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and con-
straining function of wrong beliefs in young children's understanding of deception. Cog-
nition, 13(1): 103-128.
Wing, Lorna and Judith Gould (1979).
Severe impairments of social interaction and
associated abnormalities in children: Epidemiology and classification. Journal of Autism
and Developmental Disorders, 9: 11-29.
Wing, Lorna and John K. Wing (1971). Multiple impairments in early childhood autism.
Journal of Autism and Childhood Schizophrenia, 1: 256-266.
Yergeau, M. [Remi] (2016). Occupying autism: Rhetoric, involuntarity, and the meaning
of autistic lives. In Block, P., D. Kasnitz, A. Nishida, and N. Pollard, editors, Occupy-
ing Disability: Critical Approaches to Community, Justice, and Decolonizing Disability,
pages 83-95. Springer, Dordrecht.
Yirmiya, Nurit and Cory Shulman (1996). Seriation, conservation, and theory of mind
abilities in individuals with autism, individuals with mental retardation, and normally
developing children. Child Development, 67(5): 2045-2059.
Yirmiya, N., D. Solomonica-Levi, C. Shulman, and T. Pilowsky (1996). Theory of mind
abilities in individuals with autism, down syndrome, and mental retardation of unknown
etiology: The role of age and intelligence. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
37: 1003-1014.
Zelazo, Philip David, Jacob A. Burack, Elizabeth Benedetto, , and Douglas Frye (1996).
Theory of mind and rule use in individuals with down's syndrome: A test of the unique-
ness and specificity claims. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 37(4): 479-484.

